---
templateKey: blog-post
title: The evolution of business applications architecture
date: 2017-01-04T15:04:10.000Z
description: >-
  In this article I will describe the evolution of business applications
  architecture from the invention of the computer until today and why I believe
  that the dominant business applications architecture for the next decade will
  be a rich clients web architecture where most of the application logic is
  executed on the client.
tags:
  - ''
---
Some history

The first dominant business applications architecture that was used staring in the 1950 and until the 1990 was the terminal server architecture. I started my career as a professional developer working in this type of architecture on a VAX minicomputer running the VMS operating system. At that time, we had mainframes and minicomputers that executed all the applications logic in a centralized manner and terminals that just displayed the applications screens to the users and captured users inputs. The main advantage of this architecture was that deployment was easy to perform. You only had to deploy your application on the mainframe or minicomputer and because no parts of the application resided on the clients, once the server was updated all your users where using the new version of your application. The main disadvantage was that user interface was very limited, the display was characters based and the users inputs was limited to a keyboard. Each time the users interacted with the application a request was made to the server and the screen on the terminal was refreshed by the server.

The terminal server architecture was replaced in the 1990 with the client server architecture, where most of the application logic was moved to the clients and the server was in most cases limited to a database server to store and share data between clients. My first professional experience with this type of application architecture was with Borland Delphi 3 in the late 1990. The advantage of this architecture compared to the terminal server architecture was that you where not limited anymore to the characters base user interface that was used in the terminal server architecture and you could use the power on each personal computers to provide rich users interfaces that where executed on the clients. One on the main disadvantage of this architecture was that the deployment of an applications was fare more complex that with the terminal server architecture. You needed to deploy the application on each client and there was potential compatibility issues between different clients for example if you had to support different operating systems on different clients.

Then in the early 2000 the client server architecture started to be replaced with the thin client web architecture. At that time, most of the application logic went back to the server. This solved the deployment problem that existed with the client server architecture, but brought back the problem of having to go to the server every time the user performed some action on the client. At that time, the web was mostly used to display HTML pages generated by the server and capture input in HTML forms that where submitted to the server. The use of JavaScript to include some application logic on the client was limited by the incompatibility of the different browsers and by the poor performance of JavaScript execution in the browsers of that time.

The shift to a rich clients web architecture

Starting in 2006, with the release of Internet Explorer 7, jQuery 1.0 and Google Web Toolkit 1.0 (GWT), we saw an increase in the amount of logic that was executed in the web browser. Internet Explorer 7 improved significantly the compliance of Internet Explorer with w3c standards and together with jQuery 1.0 they contributed significantly to reduce the browsers incompatibilities problems of JavaScript. At the same time, Google Web Toolkit provided the first successful example of what a rich clients web architecture could look like by compiling Java into JavaScripts that would run in the browser.  At the time, JavaScript development was still very immature and lacked the tools and frameworks that we have today and GWT made the benefits of a rich clients web architecture accessible to all Java developers without the need to develop in JavaScript.

Starting around 2010, we saw the apparition  of JavaScript frameworks like BackboneJS, EmberJS and AngularJS that enabled developers to create rich clients web applications directly in JavaScript (without the need for the Java to JavaScript compilation used in GWT) and connect those applications to REST backend to interact with data on the server. At the same time we saw a large improvement in JavaScript execution performance in all major browsers, the creation of testing framework like JasmineJS and MochaJS and improved support in IDE like WebStorm. At that point all of the elements for the adoption of the rich clients web architecture was present but one: The developers. At that time JavaScript was still perceived by professional developers not to be a real programming language and the one that had JavaScript experience where mostly HTML integrators that lacked the expertise of professional developers to build robust enterprise applications. This I believe to be the most important factor that slowed the adoption of the rich clients web architecture in the past 5 years.

Now in 2015, things have progressed and I was surprised to see when interviewing computer sciences students for an internship that some didn’t know much about Java development but knew NodeJS very well. I was also surprised to see in a job posting the salarie for a AngularJS developer higher than the salarie for a Java developers in the same company. We can see a clear trend toward better acceptance of the JavaScript language by professional developers even if there is still lots of resistances specially among older professional developers. Also we see that some of the former HTML integrators have evolved into full fledge web developers with better software engineering practices. You still need to be careful because not all HTML integrators have been able to make the shift to become competent web developers, but some have been able to.

The shift to a rich clients web architecture is just starting to gain real speed, but I’m confident that this will accelerate in the years to come and that it will become the dominant architecture for business applications in the next decade.

The advantages of a rich clients web architecture

Rich clients web architecture has many advantages compared to the architectures that preceded it:

It retain the deployment avantages of the thin client web architecture.

It reduce significantly the network trafic used by web applications compared to the thin clients web architecture by only sending the data to the clients and not the complete HTML page for each request.

It improve the users experience compared to the thin clients web architecture by not reloading the page for each user action and by providing immediate feedback to the user without waiting for the server response.

There is still situations where a thin client web architecture would be more appropriate. For exemple, when the exact same HTML pages are served to all users for an extended period of time, then rendering the pages on the server and using proper caching techniques will create a better users experience than rendering the pages on the client, but for business applications that by definition need a high level of interaction with the users, the rich clients web architecture is the best solution to improve users experience.
